How universities respond to AI depends not only on what AI is but also on what it is understood to be. The ways that AI is portrayed within the higher education literature helps shape research, policy and practice, and discourses about technology can be powerful. For example, such discourses can legitimate particular notions of labour and productivity, such as the promotion of flexible working and the conflation of work and home (Fisher, 2010). Indeed, Fisher (2010, p. 231) writes ‘the discourse on technology is not simply a reflection of the centrality of technology in the operation of modern societies; instead, it plays a constitutive role in their operation, and enables precisely that centrality’. Thus, we suggest analysing the discourses of AI within the higher education literature provides insights into how we are constructing AI’s possibilities within our field.

Accounts tending towards utopia-just-around-the-corner also propose a response as a matter of survival but frame it as one of positive transformation. For example, Moscardini et al. (2020, p. 11) state ‘transformation of the university is not just a good idea, it is imperative for their survival’ [bold ours]. They argue that universities need to shift their educational focus from employment to ethics and sustainability and become a ‘learning organisation’, thus raising the priority of the teaching role above the research role. Further, they foresee an emancipatory turn in which Industry 4.0 will create a ‘Digital Athens’ where citizens will have increased leisure and a living wage. This will lead people to seek education to forge social connections and learn how to live meaningfully, with both pursuits shaping the university purpose instead of the current vocational orientation. At a less lofty level, Jackson and Tomlinson (2020) note graduate labour market impacts of Industry 4.0, including AI, and argue that universities should focus on actively promoting students’ career planning.

